So, we argued that we would like to measure
efficiency of an algorithm in terms of basic
operations, and we would like to compute the
running time of an algorithm in terms of a
function of its input size n, and we also
saw that if you go from say n square to n
log n then the size of inputs you can effectively
handle becomes dramatically larger.
Now, today we will try to formulate some of
these notions a little more clearly.
So, the first thing is the input size.
So, remember that the running time of an algorithm
will necessarily depend on the size of the
input.
So, we want to write the running time as some
function t of n.
And the main thing to remember is that not
all inputs of size n will give the same running
time.
So, there is going to be a notion of worst
case estimate which we will need to explain
and justify.
Before we do this let us look at the notion
of input size itself - how do we determine
the input size for a given problem?
So, the input size more or less represents
the amount of space it takes to write down
the description of the problem or becomes
a natural parameter of the problem.
So, for instance, when we are sorting arrays
what really matters is how many objects there
are to solve, so we have to move them around
and rearrange them.
So, the size of an array is quite a natural
notion of input size for a sorting problem.
On the other hand, if you are trying to do
something like rearranging elements or take
say we have some items which we need to load
into a container and we are looking for an
optimum subset load in terms of weight or
volume then the number of objects would be
a natural input parameter.
We saw in one of the early lectures an example
of air travel where we constructed a graph
of an airline route map where the nodes where
the cities and the edges where the flights.
And we argued that both the number of cities
and the number of flights will have an impact
on any analysis we need to do.
So, this is a general property of all graphs;
if we have a graph then both the number of
nodes or vertices and the number of edges
will determine the input size.
Now, there is an important class of problems
where we have to be a little bit careful about
how we talk about input size, and these are
problems involving numbers.
Suppose we were to write an algorithm for
primality; checking whether the given number
is prime.
Now, how should we think of the size of the
input?
For instance, suppose we ask it to solve the
question for say 5003 and then for 50003 then
50003 is roughly 10 times 5003.
So, would we expect the time to grow proportional
to 10.
So, should the magnitude of n actually be
taken as the input size.
Now, it is quite obvious when we do arithmetic
by hand, the kind of arithmetic we do in school,
that we do not go by magnitude, we go by the
number of digits.
When we do arithmetic such as addition with
carry we right down the numbers in columns
then we add them column by column.
So, the number of digits determines how many
columns we have to add.
The same is true with subtraction or addition
or multiplication or long division and so
on.
So, clearly, it is the number of digits which
matters.
And the number of digits is actually the same
as the log.
If you have numbers written in base 10 then
if we have a 6 digit number its log is going
to be 5.something.
And we go to log 6, we will have a 7 digit
number and so on.
So, the number of digits is directly proportional
to the log, so we can think of the log of
the number as the input size.
So, this is a special case.
So, for arithmetic functions involving numbers,
it is not the number itself which is the input
size, but the size of the number as expressed
in how many digits it takes us to write down
the number.
Now, the other thing, we mentioned is that
we are going to ignore constants.
We are going to look at these functions in
terms of orders of magnitude, does the function
grow as n, n square, n cube, and so on.
So, one justification for this is because
we are ignoring the notion of a basic operation
or rather we are being a bit vague about it.
So, let us look at an example.
So, supposing, we would originally consider
our basic operations to be assignments to
variables or comparisons between variables.
Now, we decide that we will include swapping
2 values exchanging the contents of x and
y as a basic operation.
Now, one of the first things we learn in programming
is that in order to do this we need to go
via temporary variables.
So, in order to exchange x and y in most programming
languages you have to first save x in a temporary
variable then copy y to x and then restore
y from the temporary variable; this takes
3 assignments.
So, if we take swap as a basic operation in
our language as compared to a calculation
where we only look at assignments we are going
to collapse 3 assignments into 1 basic operation.
So, there is the factor of 3 differences between
how we would account for the operations if
we account for swap as a single operation.
So, in order to get away from worrying about
these factors of 3 and 2 and so on, one important
way to do this is to just ignore these constants
when we are doing this calculation.
So, that is in other motivation for only looking
at orders of magnitude.
So, let us come back to this notion of worst
case.
So, as we said we are really looking at all
inputs of size n; and, among these inputs
which inputs drive the algorithm to take the
maximum amount of time.
So, let us look at a simple algorithm here
which is looking for a value k in an unsorted
array A. So, in an unsorted array we have
no idea where the value k can be.
So, the only thing we can do is walk from
the beginning to end.
So, we start by initializing this index i
which is in position 0, and then we have a
loop which says, so along as we have not found
the array element.
So, along as A i is not k we increment, right,
we move to the next element.
So, this is the loop, and when we exit this
loop there are 1 or 2 possibilities, either
we have found the element in which case i
is less than n, or we have not found the element
in this case i has become n.
So, we check whether i is less than n; if
i is less than n then we have found it, and
if i is bigger than n that means it is not
found.
So, this is a simple algorithm.
So, now, in this algorithm the bottle neck
is this loop, right.
So, this can take upto n iterations.
Now, when will it take n iterations?
That is the worst case, right.
So, the worst case in this particular algorithm
is it must go to the end either if the last
element is k, or more generally if there is
no copy of k in the array.
If there is no k in the array we have to scan
all the elements to determine that k does
not exist.
So, this becomes our worst case input.
So, it is important to be able to look at
an algorithm and try to reconstruct what input
to drive it to take the maximum amount of
time.
So, in this simple case, this simple example
we can see that the case which forces us to
execute the entire loop can be generated by
choosing a value of k which is not in the
array A.
And in this case, therefore the worst case
is proportional to the size of the array n.
The crucial thing to remember is that in order
to determine which is the worst case input,
we have to understand the algorithm and look
at it.
We cannot just blindly determine what is the
worst case without knowing the problem at
hand.
To different algorithms we have to come up
with different worst cases depending on what
the algorithm is supposed to do, and how the
algorithm is constructed.
So, the worst case input is a function of
the algorithm itself.
Now, we could look at a different measure,
right.
So, supposing we do not look at the worst
case, we say, look at the average case, right.
So, look at all possible inputs and then try
to see how much time it takes when each of
the inputs are somehow average it out.
Now, mathematically in order to compute this
kind of an average we need to have a good
way of estimating what are all the possible
inputs to a problem.
So, although this sounds like a very attractive
notion, in many problems it is very difficult.
So, supposing we are doing the airline route
problem, how do we consider the space of all
possible route maps, and what is a typical
route map, and so on.
So, what are we going to average over, are
all this inputs equally likely, so we need
look at probabilities.
And it is very often very difficult to estimate
the probabilities of different types of inputs.
So, though it would make more sense from the
point of view of the behavior of the algorithm
in practical situations to look at the average
case that is how does it behave over a space
of inputs.
In practice, it is very hard to do this because
we cannot really quantify the space of possible
inputs and assign them with meaningful probabilities.
To summarize, we look at worst case even though
it could be unrealistic because the average
case is hard if not impossible to compute.
There are very limited situations where it
is possible to do an average case analysis,
but these are very rare.
So, the good thing about a worst case analysis
is if we can prove a good upper bound, saying
that, even in the worst case if algorithm
performs efficiently then we have got a useful
piece of information about the algorithm;
that is this always works well.
On the other hand, if we find out that this
algorithm has a bad worst case upper bound
we may have to look a little further, how
rare is this worst case, does this often arise
in practice, what type of inputs are worst
case, are they inputs that we would typically
see, are there any simplifying assumptions
that we can make which will rule out these
worst cases and so on.
So, though worst case analysis is not a perfect
way of doing it, it is something which is
mathematically tractable, it is something
that we can kind of hope to compute.
So, that is one good reason for doing it so
that we actually come up with a quantitative
estimate.
And secondly, it does give us some useful
information; even though in some situations
it not be, may not be the most realistic situation
that we are likely to come across in practice.